---
title: Mana
date: 2024-02-26
categories:
  - Mechanics
tags:
  - mana
  - essence
math: true
---
Mana is a ephemeral pseudo-particle that cannot be directly observed or interacted with. It is created solely through essence and has an extremely short half-life. Mana cannot be described as a type of matter or form of energy and has no influence over any fundamental forces or physics fields.

The key property of mana, however, is it's ability to influence quantum probability. This property can be used to convince extremely unlikely quantum events to occur by shifting and scaling the probability function of specific particles by a given amount. With enough mana particles influencing a given set of molecules, seemingly unnatural events can be observed on a macro scale.
## Overview
Mana is a ephemeral particle created by [essence](/posts/essence) for the purpose of manipulating the world in some way. This mana can then be given instructions on specific acts to perform. At a macro scale, these effects form what is colloquially referred to as magic.

At it's core, mana is simply a tool for large-scale probability manipulation. By making extremely unlikely events to occur at a quantum scale, macro scale events that occur that seem defy the logic of common physics.

As mana only correlates through an offset from standard physics via probability manipulation, the amount of mana being used allows for a more significant effect. It is far less likely that many different atoms will all perform an unlikely action, and thus more mana is required to make that event happen.

It is worth noting that the amount of mana does not guarantee that significance of the result. The quality of the instructions being provided are critical in determining how effective the result will be at achieving it's goal.
## Creation
Mana is created at a constant rate by essence. The density of the essence directly correlates with amount of mana created. Essence will always create mana at the constant rate of to one unit of mana per second per unit of essence.

Mana will always be created in the inactive state with it's attunement ratio matching the ratio of the essence creating it. For example, an individual with a 20% ice affinity, 10% earth affinity, and so on, will create mana such that 20% of all particles created have are ice attuned, while 10% of the particles are earth attuned.
### Mana Veins
Mana veins are conceptual pathways that exist in all objects where mana creation is most dense. While mana can be generated anywhere within an object, certain areas of the object contain a far higher density than others. The areas of high density are referred to as mana veins. These veins do not have any physical properties that would distinguish them from any other areas of the object, regardless of the type of object, and can only be measured by observing the area with a mana perception ability.

#### Mana Loci
While mana is passively generated in high densities along mana veins, these behavior is shifted slightly when mana is actively being used. A mana loci forms when an object begins to actively attempt to use mana. During this period, all newly generated mana is concentrated around a specific point within the user. This point is referred to as the mana loci. This point is not bound to a static position and may be moved around at any time.

In some cases, multiple loci may appear within a caster, depending on the intention of the mana. It is worth noting that *all* mana created within a mana loci are created already in the active state. It is also often observed that mana loci do not appear if the caster is not using any mana, consciously or passively. Moving around mana, for example, does not cause a loci to appear.

Entities without a physical form, such as spirits and divinities, also have a mana loci when actively using mana. This loci can exist anywhere within the world, outside of physical matter.
#### Leylines
Similar to mana veins, places and regions with sufficient levels of essence will also generate enough mana for mana veins to become observable. These large-scale mana veins are most often referred to as leylines. Given the sheer quantity of mana being generated within within a region for these leylines to become observable, they are often considered highly sought after fonts of power.

The amount of mana that can be discovered within these leylines depends highly on the size of the region as well as the level of essence. Leylines are far more frequent and far more powerful in smaller regions of high significance.
#### Ambient Mana
The term ambient mana refers to all the mana generated within regions and by spirits outside of objects or leylines. As this mana cannot be stored, it has an extremely short half-life and is replaced just as quickly. This leads to a large amount of inactive mana floating around in most places within the world.

Ambient mana levels may change as mana is concentrated into mana loci by significant contributing entities, (such as high level regions or very high level spirits), or when contributing entities gain a significant amount of new essence.

As spirits do not have a body, and thus no set location to create mana, mana from spirits appears to generated uniformly across the entire planet. Spirits are the only entities that do not have mana veins, meaning all of their unused mana is ambient mana. This includes mana from divinities.
### States
Mana can be described as having two states, active and inactive. Only mana in an active state can interact with the world 

All mana particles are created in an inactive state in which they have no influence on matter or energy in any way. Within this state, they has an extremely short half-life and quickly decay into nothing. This is often referred to as the "storage" state, as long-term storage of mana is only possible in this state by having it occupy the space inside specific crystals. (See [storage](#storage))

Once a mana particle is given a set of instructions, either through essence or another mana particle influencing it, it will move into an active state. In this state, the mana particle will proceed to immediately execute its given instructions, destroying itself in the process. These instructions may be overridden by other mana particles, but cannot be removed once provided.
### Storage
Mana can only be stored long term within a crystal without it immediately starting to decay. While active mana will not decay until it has completed it's given instruction set, it cannot be stored in any way during this state. Inactive mana, on the other hand, will decay within seconds but can be placed within a crystal to drastically increase it's half life. The duration of storage depends on the type of crystal and attunement of the mana.

While the size of a crystal does not effect it's storage duration, it does determine the quantity of mana that can be stored within. If more mana particles are stored within a crystal than it's size would allow, the additional mana particles will continue decay at a standard rate despite still being within the crystal.

All mana within the crystal will naturally spread out into an even density throughout the crystal. The speed at which this diffusion occurs depends on the type and purity of the crystal. When crystals with a low mana conductivity have a high rate of mana being inserted, mana density may build up too quickly in a single area, causing that area of the crystal to become full before the rest of the crystal and leading to mana loss through natural decay.

It is highly recommending to have multiple points of insertion around the crystal when channeling have rates of mana into a crystal with low conductivity.
## Attunement
All mana is created with a specific attunement. This natural attunement of the mana acts as a sort of collection of pre-existing instructions that the mana can follow. Mana of a specific attunement is capable of being converted from one type of attunement to another by essence, by the rate of conversion is greatly dependent on the affinity of the essence.
## Mana Friction
Mana friction is the emergence of minor side-effects that occur when moving around large amounts of mana. As mana is being moved, a small portion of this mana is sometimes activated too early or on the wrong target, leading to common side effects. 

These effects most often include, but are not limited to:
- Glowing
- Darkness
- Vibrations
- Sounds
- Heating
- Cooling
- Uneasy Feeling
- Alluring Feeling
- etc

The type of effects that may occur depend completely on the attunement of the mana being used.

This mana friction can be seen most frequently in active spells being cast, enchanted items, runes, and spell circles. It is through the use of mana friction that individuals without a dedicated mana perception ability are capable of observing active mana and spells. An enchanted item or magical material will almost always provide enough mana friction to inform individuals of the significance of the item.

Mana friction can also be observed within high level individuals as mana is created and moved around through their body. This natural movement and friction is often referred to as a person's aura, and is an easy, yet unreliable, method of estimating the level of a target.