---
title: Essence
date: 2024-02-25
categories:
  - Mechanics
tags:
  - essence
  - levels
  - mana
math: true
---
Essence is a pseudo-force of reality that permeates all aspects of existence. Unlike traditional forces that appear in physics, essence operates on a lower fundamental level, acting as a field tied to concepts instead of physical boundaries. While essence exists as a force that exists universally among abstract concepts, the density in which essence operates varies greatly from concept to concept. Its effects can be readily seen through creatures, locations, objects, and even ideas imbued with higher densities of essence having their properties and interactions highly influenced in profound ways.
## Overview
Essence, as a pseudo-force, is often described as operating on the principle of anti-entropy, though this description is an oversimplification. It is a force that tends towards imposing order and structure upon the universe by manipulating probability, matter, and energy. While essence is a force that is universal in its presence, it cannot directly interact with the world in any way and it cannot be measured or observed.

However, it does interact with the world indirectly through the usage of pseudo-quantum particles known as [mana](/posts/essence/index.html), which serve as an intermediary between essence and the physical world. These mana particles enact extremely improbable events or alterations, effectively shaping reality in accordance with the inherent properties of the essence involved.
## Effects
## Density
## Affinity
### Gaining Essence
### Essence Leak